APE0: the Astropy Project Governance Charter (#61)
astropy/astropy-APEs: APE0.rst

The Astropy Project Bylaws
==========================

> author: The Astropy Governance Working Group: Tom Aldcroft, Matt Craig, Kelle Cruz, Lia Corrales, Steve Crawford, Nicole Foster, Pey Lian Lim, Stuart Mumford, Adrian Price-Whelan, Thomas Robitaille, David Shupe, Brigitta Sipocz, Erik Tollerud

Author: The decision to have it be the WG and not individuals was a pretty strong one within the WG so I don't want to unilaterally pull it back.  But I see your point the double-colon is weird, so maybe a semicolon?

(Also Historically we've used "author" for multiple authors in other APEs it looks like...)

date-created: 2020 July 31

date-last-revised: 2020 July 31

date-accepted: <replace with accepted date>

type: Process

status: Discussion

Abstract
========
This APE is a living document that defines the formal fundamental governance process for the Astropy Project. Governance is based around the election of a Coordination Committee. The Coordination Committee has broad authority, which they seek to exercise as rarely as possible by working towards consensus.

Detailed description
====================

> The bylaws are described in this section. The initial version is the outcome of several months of discussion by the Astropy Governance Working Group, which aimed to both codification of existing informal governance rules as well as update it with new ideas that are consistent with the philosophy of and vision for the Astropy project.

Reviewer: update it -> what is 'it'? it sounds like it refers to the rules but then it should be 'them'

Ultimate Authority: The Astropy Community
-----------------------------------------

> At its core, the Astropy Project derives its authority from the whole community - developers, users, and even potential participants in the broader astronomical and scientific software community. All have a vested interest in the success of the Project, so all governance in the end belongs to this community in its entirety.  The governance bylaws described below provide levels of delegation of that authority, particularly to the voting members and the Coordination Committee.  The Astropy Project broadly follows the philosophy of do-ocracy: project participants who gain experience and knowledge through sustained community contributions and have demonstrated adherence to core principles of inclusion and consensus-building will be entrusted with increasing levels of authority. At its core, the Project is both by and for its community, so it is the final source of authority and direction.

Reviewer: In the last sentence, in 'it is the final source' what is 'it'? Make clearer that it is the community (not the project)

Author: (moved elsewhere, but agree!)

The Coordination Committee
--------------------------

Composition
^^^^^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four members. To represent a broad set of interests, the Coordination Committee should have no more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described below) and Coordination Committee should work to maintain this composition following the processes laid out in these bylaws.

Mandate
^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee’s role is to facilitate consensus in the Project and coordinate Project-spanning efforts.  As such, the Coordination Committee shall work to:

> * Maintain the quality and stability of the Astropy ecosystem of packages for the community,

Reviewer 2: All these itemized lists need a blank line  in front to be rendered properly.

Author: You're right!  The danger of trusting in "automatic" conversion-tools... thanks, will fix

* Facilitate the development of resources that improve accessibility and understanding of the Astropy ecosystem,
* Make contributing as accessible, inclusive, and sustainable as possible,
* Oversee the financial and legal status of the project,
* Lead and oversee the decision making process for APEs and other community decisions,
* Seek consensus among the Astropy community, particularly before acting in a formal capacity,
* Act as the decision-making body where all other methods for achieving consensus have failed,
* Operate openly and provide transparency and opportunity for community input into its activities.

Powers
^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee has broad authority to make decisions about the Project. For example, they can:

> * Accept or reject APEs;

Reviewer: and updates to APEs?

Reviewer: and maybe add (with the exception of this APE, see below)

Making decisions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To use its powers, if consensus cannot be reached within the committee, the Coordination Committee votes. Every Coordination Committee member must either vote or explicitly abstain. Members with conflicts of interest on a particular vote must abstain. The final decision regarding what constitutes a conflict of interest in terms of serving on the Coordination Committee, during elections or individual votes is determined by the Ombudsperson in accordance with a published conflict of interest policy. Passing decisions requires a strict majority of non-abstaining Coordination Committee members.
Whenever possible, the Coordination Committee's deliberations and votes shall be held in public in a manner which permits discussion and comments from the community.

Electing the Coordination Committee
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Coordination Committee election is held annually to fill any vacant seats. Notice of the election must be posted via the Project’s standard communication channels (reaching all active Voting Members) at least one month before the beginning of Phase 1.  The election consists of two phases, each lasting two weeks:

> * Phase 1: Candidates advertise their interest in serving. Candidates can be nominated by anyone, including self-nominations, and do not have to be Voting Members themselves. 

Reviewer: Voting Members is sometimes capitalized, sometimes not

* Phase 2: Each voting member can vote for zero or more of the candidates, up to the number of candidates. Voting is performed anonymously. Candidates are ranked by the total number of votes they receive. If a tie occurs, it may be resolved by mutual agreement among the candidates, or else the winner will be chosen at random.
The election process is managed by a non-voting Returns Officer nominated by the outgoing Coordination Committee. For the initial election, the Returns Officer will be nominated by the NumFOCUS Executive officer or their delegate. Elections will be carried out every year, provided that at least one of the Coordination Committee members has reached the end of their term or decided to step down.

Term
^^^^
Each Coordination Committee member's term runs for three years from when the election results are finalized, except when the election was to fill a vacancy created part way through a term. In that case the newly-elected member’s term runs for the remainder of the term of the person they are replacing. There are no limits on the number of terms that a single individual can be elected for.

> For the initial election of Coordination Committee members, two seats will have terms of one year, one has a term of two years and one has a term of three years so as to create a staggered set of replacements and provide continuity in the Coordination Committee.

Reviewer: How will it be decided who stays on how long? Based on votes received? (if so, specify)

Author: Hmm. This is a sticky problem.  I'll re-word to address this.

Vacancies
^^^^^^^^^
Coordination Committee members may resign their position at any time.
Whenever there is a vacancy during the regular Coordination Committee term, the Coordination Committee must solicit nominations to fill the vacancy and an election must take place.
If a Coordination Committee member cannot be contacted for longer than two months without prior notification (for example, due to planned leave), then the rest of the Coordination Committee may vote to trigger an election to replace them for the duration of their term.

Removing Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, the Voting Members may remove one or more sitting Coordination Committee members via a single vote.
Such a vote is triggered when a Voting Member calls for one publicly on an appropriate Project-wide communication channel, and two other active Voting Members second the proposal.

> In order for the Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, 2/3 of the active Voting Members must vote in support of the removal.

Reviewer: 2/3 -> two thirds

To avoid repeated removal votes, any individual Voting Member who has called for, or seconded such a vote, may not call for or second such a vote (against any Coordination Committee member) for one year from the original motion.

The Ombudsperson
----------------

> The Ombudsperson represents the interests of the Astropy community by providing an alternative point of contact for sensitive issues such as code of conduct violations and ethical concerns. Candidates for this project role are publicly nominated by the Coordination Committee, after which the Coordination Committee allows at least 2 weeks for comment, and then the nominee must be confirmed by ⅔ of the active Voting Members.  The Ombudsperson has no term limit but can resign at any time, or be removed by the same process as being confirmed: the Coordination Committee initiates, there is a two-week comment period, and ⅔ of the active Voting Members have to approve the removal. In the period between removal/resignation and new appointment, the Coordination Committee will temporarily take over the responsibilities of the Ombudsperson, should the need arise.

Reviewer: 2 weeks -> two weeks
2/3 -> two thirds

Powers
^^^^^^
Voting Members may participate in formal votes on:
* adding new Voting Members,
* removing Voting Members,
* electing Coordination Committee members,
* removing Coordination Committee members,
* appointment or removal of the Ombudsperson,
* changes to these bylaws,
* other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is appropriate.
The mechanism, timeline, and criteria for a decisive  vote are specified in the respective sections of this document in the first six cases and by the Coordination Committee in the last case.

Membership
^^^^^^^^^^
Voting Members of the Astropy Project demonstrate:
* a good grasp of the philosophy of the Astropy Project,
* a solid track record of being constructive and helpful,
* significant contributions to the Project's goals, in any form,
* willingness to dedicate time to improving the Project,
* a willingness to recruit, train, and nominate new team members.
Voting membership acknowledges sustained and valuable efforts that align well with the philosophy and the goals of the Astropy Project.

Initial membership
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Anyone who satisfies any of the following criteria will be invited to be in the first group of Voting Members: 

Reviewer: following criteria at the date of acceptance of this APE

* The candidate will be informed promptly at the close of voting by a Coordination Committee member. If the vote is not affirmative, the Coordination Committee will provide feedback to the nominee.

Term and Active/Inactive Status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Voting membership has no term limit. Voting members who have stopped contributing are encouraged to declare themselves as "inactive.” Those who have not made any non-trivial contribution for a long period of time may be asked to move themselves to the “inactive”  category by the Coordination Committee. If no response is received, the Coordination Committee may automatically change a Voting Member’s status to inactive. To record and honor their contributions, inactive Voting members will continue to be listed. Inactive Voting Members are not able to participate in votes.

Removing Voting Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the Voting Membership against their will. Such a vote is triggered by a motion made by an active Voting Member, which must be seconded by a second Voting Member. A vote must be held on removing the Voting Member, concluding no more than four weeks after the motion is seconded. Removal requires approval by ⅔ of all active Voting Members at the time the motion is made. The motion, second, and vote should all be private. A removal under this provision will be reflected by updating the list of Voting Members. 

Reviewer: 2/3 -> two thirds

It may be necessary for the Ombudsperson and the Coordination Committee to remove a Voting Member for violations of the Code of Conduct. In this case, the Coordination Committee and Ombudsperson will work together to make this decision. 

Rules for creation and appointment of roles
-------------------------------------------
Creation of and appointment to roles to which the Coordination Committee delegates its power must solicit community feedback for no less than two weeks.

Approving and modifying these bylaws
------------------------------------

> This document was submitted following the process in APE 1, and the normal APE acceptance procedures will be followed. The Coordination Committee at the time of submitting this APE are all co-authors and therefore will not override any consensus of the community on accepting the final version.

Reviewer: Link to APE 1

> Changes to these bylaws after they have been accepted should follow the modification process in APE 1, with the exception that the final approval of the modification requires approval vote by ⅔ of the Voting Members rather than approval by the Coordination Committee. This should follow the same voting procedure as other votes in this document.

Reviewer: 2/3 -> two thirds

direction.

Detailed Description
====================
The Governance Charter is described in this section. The initial version is the
outcome of several months of discussion by the Astropy Governance Working Group,
which aimed to both codify existing informal governance rules as well as update
them with new ideas that are consistent with the philosophy of and vision for
the Astropy project.

Ultimate Authority: The Astropy Community
-----------------------------------------
The Astropy Project derives its authority from the whole community - developers,
users, and even potential participants in the broader astronomical and
scientific software community. All have a vested interest in the success of the
Project, so all governance in the end belongs to this community in its entirety.
The governance Charter described below provides levels of delegation of that
authority, particularly to the Voting Members and the Coordination Committee.

The Coordination Committee
--------------------------

Composition
^^^^^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four members. To
represent a broad set of interests, the Coordination Committee should have no

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 3: Since there is a clause that a strict majority is needed, i.e., 3 out of 4, I guess 2 from one place cannot really drive decision making, though they could stall it. But it would seem nice if CoCo had geographic breadth, and having 5 members would have the advantage that perhaps 4 could be considered a quorum so that one doesn't always have to get everyone together.

The main question may be how many people are going to want to be nominated? I suspect that we'll regularly have elections by acclaim or with a choice of N out of N+1... In that respect, one option would be to say that a second member from a given institution can only happen if otherwise there would be too few candidates.

Anyway, I'd also support making it 5. Certainly, 3 seems too few (one forceful individual can sway another and decide too much), and 6 too many (no-one will feel responsible to actually get things done).

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 4: 👍 on five members for all the reasons @mhvk listed.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/314716/95623331-fd754980-0a6c-11eb-89ab-05350fe8ffd3.gif)

Just for the record I would be happy with five which as a side benefit **guarantees** at least one new person on the CoCo at the first elections.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: >if otherwise there would be too few candidates

Could you clarify this? In my mind, multiple people can still run from a given institute during an election (and I would consider it even a good feature as it would be up to the community to decide whom they prefer not some internal politics). However it would be only the one with the higher votes would serve on the committee (basically we have the same situation already with the current draft when 3 people are nominated from the same place)

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 6: Didn't we debate for a lot time on the numbers `{3, 4, 5}` and then settled on 4 somehow. Are we doing it all over again?

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: we can go into the particulars of how that close vote came to be, but the point here really is that 2 out of the 4 is disproportional if it ends up in the same building.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 3: @bsipocz - sorry, I was unclear. I just meant that if there are really few candidates, it would be better to have more than one from one institute than fewer than the nominal number of CoCo members. So, with multiple candidates from a single institute, the one with the most votes would get in, and any others only if there were no other candidates with votes left.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: Note that the 4 vs 5 question  was discussed in the WG - most everyone agreed 3 is too few and 6 is too many. When we did a straw poll for 4 vs 5 it was a 3-to-4 vote and no one objected to either, so this was just only chosen by a slim majority. 

 But I think I was the prime advocate for 4 so I'll try to give the argument (I will try to state my position in a way that does not seem heavy-handed, @bsipocz, but please let me know either here or via Slack DM or through an intermediary if there's some way I can state this position in a way you find less concerning.) Currently we have 4 members in the CoCo, which requires 3/4 of the committee to agree to be able to approve something. That is *good* because it means if more than one person objects to something we have to revise the idea until there's only one (or typically zero) outliers. With 5 people, there's much more potential for there to be a "minority faction" of 2 that feels marginalized.  4 prevents that while still having a fairly broad perspective. The current CoCo (and according to the notes, at least some fraction of the WG) agreed that the better solution to the CoCo being overwhelmed with tasks is for them to delegate more rather than grow to a larger size.

On the two-from-one-place question, indeed @mhvk's point is what motivated the discussion there - that 2 is a number that at a size of 4 cannot control the agenda. And if an institution is getting two people on the CoCo solely to stall progress in Astropy, well... I think we have bigger problems. But the added part of the two-for-one-place discussion is that there's some concern that it's going to be difficult to find enough candidates (which growing to 5 magnifies), so adding a further restriction makes that even harder.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: Now for my perspective just as *me*: I like 4 for the reasons I said above.  But I can live with 5 if others are not persuaded by it, and similar for the two-from-one-place vs one-from-one-place.

Although really I have to say, @astrofrog's point in https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/314716/95623331-fd754980-0a6c-11eb-89ab-05350fe8ffd3.gif may be the most persuasive...

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: >  that 2 is a number that at a size of 4 cannot control the agenda

2 totally controls the agenda, it's even enough that 1 of the remaining two doesn't care that much about that particular issue to put up an argument. There is a clear desire (see @mhvk's comment above, or the outcome of preferences on the anonimoous sticky notes last year's coordination meeting) to grow geographically and the current 3/4 of the coco and 3/4 of the finance residing in the NE corridor could be made worse only by having multiple people from the same institute. 

I can live with the 4, but still don't see in the good thing a setup where you everywhere argues for consensus yet prefer a 3 vs 1  stand than working for a middle ground solution with a "minority fraction". If it's always the same 2 ends up being the minority that's a really good indication that something is not going exactly well. 

If the delegation acually works out it may be indeed a way to offload the load, but you have fighted all the way so far for each delegation item (the long discussion about keeping the decision with the coco about the affiliated review comes to mind for example).

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 7: FWIW, I also prefer 4 over 5 on the CoCo. I think we, the current CoCo, have put a lot of effort into delegating, offloading, putting things to the community to work on and that we should continue to improve on that front instead of adding more people to the CoCo.

I also don't mind if the max is 1 per institution.

Since we may not easily find consensus on these two issues, is it worth figuring out how to do straw polls at this stage? I would be happy with just putting the question in the #project slack channel and letting people emoji vote.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 3: @bsipocz original comment was mainly about not allowing 2 people per institution, and I definitely think input from the current CoCo is super relevant.

How about making the sentence clearer that it would only be allowed if otherwise there would not be enough people? E.g., how about the following (also replacing "broad set of interests" with "diversity" as that can include more than just interest, including geography; could be "diversity and broad set of interests" too):
```
To represent the diversity of the astropy community, the Coordination Committee
should not have more than one member from any particular employer
(unless otherwise it is not possible to get full membership).
```

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer: 👍 to @mhvk's suggested wording although 'full membership' might have to be spelt out more clearly

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 8: I don't have an opinion on different numbers, but wouldn't it make sense to require--or at least prefer (since it may not always be possible depending on who volunteers) that at least one member of the committee have software engineering experience?  E.g. I don't think it should all be people in strictly academic positions.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 4: I like @embray 's thought. Similarly, we might want to state that no more than 2 (or 3 for a five member committee) can live on the same continent (I suggest the following lists of continents: Europe, North America, Middle and South America, Africa, Asia, Australia + New Zeeland + Antartica).

Other axes of diversity might be more difficult( e.g. it would be great to have different socio-economic backgrounds, but I don't want anyone to reveal their parents income just to be able to volunteer for a committee).

The real problem with making this a requirement is what to do if we don't have enough candidates, e.g. if we need to fill a seat with a non-US person and we only have US volunteers. If instead we only call it a "preference", it might not help much in practice: In that case, anyone can volunteer for any seat, and it's up to the voters to choose - and they may or may not follow that "preference".

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 3: Also like it, but share the fear that in practice there will be few candidates. One big advantage of the staggered replacement scheme proposed here is that one can quickly adjust if the committee lacks diversity along any given axis - i.e., twist people's arms so that they will allow themselves to stand for the next election...

Anyway, maybe it is best for now to express a wish for diversity in the broadest sense and see how it goes?

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: I feel @embray's point has more practical consequences. E.g. if the CoCo swifts away from the development process we can easily end up again in the same situation as it was for this past feature freeze where they make decisions overriding the developers without giving any thought about the consequences of those decisions on the software (release process in this case), then conveniently putting the blame back on the one who had no say in the matters, like things happening arbitrarily in a vacuum.

And there are examples in the broader python community where that is exactly what is happening, those in the top committees has nothing to do with the development process any more resulting developers are burning out in an extreme rate as they are the ones having to deal decisions (at least the ones I was talking to, all mentioned this as a big issue within their projects).

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: While I definitely agree with @embray in principle, in practice I'm with @mhvk and @hamogu that it's going to be very difficult to *require* any of these things.  

The added problem is that if these are elections, then it's really up to the voting membership to decide. Do we actually say "person X got half as many votes as person Y but since Y is a software engineer they get the seat"?  Or do we just leave that seat open?

On top of that, in reality it's very hard to define things like "software engineering experience".  Consider someone who has an astronomy PhD but spent several years at a software company in an "engineering" role - do they count?  What about someone who got an CS/SE undergraduate degree but then got an astronomy PhD, and has been doing astronomy research for 10 years after that.  Do they count as an "engineer".  In practice I think all of these things are too hard to put down as requirements, but are much easier to state as *desirable goals*.

So I would propose wording like @mhvk's but bringing in more of these ideas, like:
```
The Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the astropy 
community.  Hence it should aim to have geographic diversity, a diversity of
astronomy and developer expertise, and aim to not have more than one 
member from any particular employer. While this may not be practical given
the realities of any given election, the community should work in this direction.
```

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: (although if someone feels especially strongly that the "more than one from any institution" is *more* important, that can always be strengthened)

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: What is even diversity of developer expertise mean? Someone with no experience whatsoever should be on coco for the sake of "developer expertise" diversity, setting the roadmap, timelines, etc? 
After all, professional software teams are managed by people who have developer side/technical experience, I fail to see why it should be different here. Certainly, we need more people who are not developers, but they should not be the ones on the top committee.

And I would define SE in this context to be someone who is working as an engineer, independently of their qualifications. We certainly need someone on the committee who represent those who are full time doing engineering, who need to deliver software for a timeline, who has engineering background knowledge, best practices, etc, rather than whose focus is primarily academic (papers, teaching, telescope operations). So, yes, in my view @astrofrog, @pllim, and @embray are engineers. Many others not so much.

Also, @mhvk's phrasing for the employer cause is much stronger, and thus I would prefer it: 
https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#discussion_r502715141

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 3: @eteq - I think I would strengthen the one-from-any-institute by perhaps writing "Hence, it should have diversity in geography, skill set (astronomy vs developer), background, etc. Furthermore, unless it would be short of candidates otherwise, it should not have more than one member from any particular employer."

Note that this is also where the voting system is somewhat important. For instance, suppose there are 4 candidates for 2 positions, with 2 from a given institution, and I think those 2 are the best but I would want my vote to indicate that it should be one of those plus another? I guess one would need to rank candidate teams (since we won't ever have more than 4, this is do-able...).

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 9: I agree in the sentiment of diversity along many axes, including employer and continent. But I am a little concerned that  it will require making many micro decisions to adopt these as strict requirements. For example, how do we define "employer"? If @astrofrog takes a subcontract from STScI, would that be considered his employer? Or for @kelle, who may be funded by the Flatiron Institute some semesters?

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: Sitting in the same building clearly falls in the 2 from one place category. As for subcontracting, I would not count, just as I would not count Kelle's company getting the ST grant/subcontract (but would count e.g two owners of the same software company). 

Also, we have the same question with the current draft but not for 2 but 3.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 5: Or an employer/role/affiliation gets into your email signature, etc then it's important enough to count for this conflict of interest situation.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: > Sitting in the same building clearly falls in the 2 from one place category. 

Hmm, I see that, but then again there are people in the software engineering team that I work in that work closely on the same team but are both not in the same building and indeed not even the same state.

So with that as an I think I'm hearing consensus at least that the "from the same employer" clause should be strengthened to something like @mhvk's recent suggestion, which I'm fine with. 

However, this discussion seems to me to be revealing that it's *very* difficult to give a clear unambiguous definition of what "employer" means in this context. I still don't object to the wording, but I think it means we shouldn't spend a ton more time on the precise definition unless someone wants to offer a compact and concrete suggestion for the text itself.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: On the other thread:

> What is even diversity of developer expertise mean? Someone with no experience whatsoever should be on coco for the sake of "developer expertise" diversity, setting the roadmap, timelines, etc?

I think @mhvk's wording might have clarified this better that it's the diversity of skill sets that's relevant. The CoCo's role currently includes a mix of jobs that range from more infrastructure-focused, to specific feature-development, to outreach to the astronomy community, to writing grant proposals, to user support. That could change over time (as discussed at the last coordination meeting, delegating more of that to interested sub-groups is hopefully the next governance stage after APE0), but since all of those are integral parts of the project, it seems legit that the CoCo should represent all of that where possible.  But it's also really hard to *mandate* that since a lot of it is subjective, hence my attempt to say these are goals not hard requirements.

> After all, professional software teams are managed by people who have developer side/technical experience, I fail to see why it should be different here. Certainly, we need more people who are not developers, but they should not be the ones on the top committee.

This is not a true statement in general. There's a constantly-raging debate in the software industry about whether it's better to have professional managers, technical managers, or a mix of the two. FOSS, if anything, is unusual in having mostly technical types at the very top.  But given my statement above, I think the reality, as in so many things, is that it's better to have a breadth of perspective as long as they can work efficiently together.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: Does that clear the idea up here?  And if so, I think this would be my new proposed wording ( including some from @mhvk, some from my suggestion, and some from the original text):

```
The Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the Astropy 
community.  Hence, it should aim for diversity in geography, skill set (both 
astronomy and developer), background, etc. Furthermore, unless it would 
be short of candidates otherwise, it should not have more than one member from 
any particular employer."
```

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer 10: I have just thought of one reason to make it 5. It would guarantee that there would be at least one new person on the first elected CoCo. Personally, I think this would be a good thing.

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Author: Note that in the version I'm about to push up, I've updated the paragraph roughly as  I said above, but have not done anything yet on the 4 vs 5 question

> more than two members from a particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in

Reviewer: Following a comment by @hamogu lower down, I made it so the APE now says four or five with the number to be decided at the initial election (see also https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#issuecomment-769284716)

Section 4) and the Coordination Committee will work to maintain this composition
following the processes laid out in this Charter.

Role
^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee’s role is to facilitate consensus in the Project and
coordinate Project-spanning efforts. As such, the Coordination Committee shall
work to:

* Maintain the quality and stability of the Astropy ecosystem of packages for
  the community,
* Facilitate the development of resources that improve accessibility and
  understanding of the Astropy ecosystem,
* Make contributing as accessible, inclusive, and sustainable as possible,
* Oversee the financial and legal status of the project,
* Lead and oversee the decision-making process for APEs and other community
  decisions,
* Seek consensus among the Astropy community, particularly before acting in a
  formal capacity,
* Act as the decision-making body where all other methods for achieving
  consensus have failed,
* Operate openly and provide transparency and opportunity for community input
  into its activities.

> Powers

Reviewer 4: How about "role" or "responsibility" instead of "power"?

Author: Hah, we now have three threads with various options for "power" alternatives... I think I may like "responsibilities" thus far, but see the thread in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#discussion_r501251734

Author: (see thread below on this)

^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee has broad authority to make decisions about the
Project. For example, they can:

* Accept or reject APEs and updates to APEs (except this one - see below);
* Enforce or update the Project's code of conduct
* Manage any project assets (including financial and physical assets)
* Delegate parts of their authority to other subcommittees or processes

However, they cannot modify the Governance of the Project (i.e., this document),
except during the initial adoption of this Charter as specified herein.

The Coordination Committee has broad authority, which it seeks to exercise as
rarely as possible by working towards consensus. The Coordination Committee
should look for ways to use these powers as little as possible, striving to
involve the community whenever possible for decisions, and delegating
responsibilities.

When delegating its power by creating roles or making appointments the
Coordination Committee must solicit community feedback for no less than two
weeks.

Making Decisions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> To use its powers, the Coordination Committee must first attempt to reach a

Reviewer 8: I'm mildly uncomfortable with references here and in a couple other places to the CoCo's "powers".  Even though this document stresses that one of the main purposes of the CoCo is to seek consensus, rather than wield "power" authoritatively, the use of the word seems to undermine that a bit.

What about we instead speak of the CoCo's "prerogatives"?  It's a little more legally precise, referring to exclusive rights (and of course can be used authoritatively), but to me it somehow sounds a little more precise and limited in scope.

Reviewer 8: So in this sentence you could write, "Before exercising its prerogatives, the Coordination Committee must ..."

Author: Good points!  I like "prerogatives" although I'm a bit concerned it's a bit too obscure of a word particularly given plenty of non-native  English speakers in the Project. But I agree with the main point here, so if no one else has a better word I think it's better than "powers".

Reviewer 6: Maybe this will help? https://www.thesaurus.com/browse/power

Author: Hmm.  The "regency of the CoCo"?  Or "the imperium of the CoCo"? :wink: 

More seriously, the only one I found that might be better is "authority" or possibly "privilege". @embray (or @pllim!) do either of those strike you as clearer?  If not I'm fine with just accepting "prerogative"

Reviewer 6: I was thinking more of "capacity" but I don't know how to make it sound nice in that sentence, so I'll defer to those with stronger opinions. 😬

Author: Oh, and I guess maybe @embray suggested "rights" later on.  I think I kinda like "priviledge" more compared to that because it makes clear that it's something the community has given the CoCo not something that comes "automatically".  But I'm open to @embray's thoughts!

Reviewer 8: Privilege is also fine.

Author: (to close the loop, I've tried to use a mix of "privilege" and "authority", because in some places "authority" was the only grammatically sensible choice)

consensus. If a consensus cannot be reached the Committee votes. Every
Coordination Committee member must either vote or explicitly abstain. Members
with a conflict of interest on a particular vote must abstain. The final
decision regarding what constitutes a conflict of interest is determined by the
Ombudsperson in accordance with the conflict of interest policy. Passing
decisions require a strict majority of non-abstaining Coordination Committee
members.

Whenever possible, the Coordination Committee's deliberations shall be held in
public in a manner that permits discussion and comments from the community.
Final decisions made by the Coordination Committee will be published in a
publicly visible location.

Electing the Coordination Committee
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Coordination Committee election is held annually to fill any vacant seats.
Notice of the election must be posted via the Project’s standard communication

> channels (reaching all active s) at least one month before the election begins.

Reviewer 8: "all active s"?

Author: yes, that was definitely a typo, thanks @embray and @pllim !

The election consists of two phases, each lasting two weeks:

* Phase 1, Nominations: Candidates will be nominated and confirm their interest
  in serving. Candidates can be nominated by anyone, including themselves, and
  do not have to be Voting Members to be nominated.
* Phase 2, Voting: Each Voting Member can vote for zero or more of the
  candidates, up to the number of candidates. Voting is performed anonymously.
  Candidates are ranked by the total number of votes they receive. If a tie
  occurs, it may be resolved by mutual agreement among the candidates, or else
  the winner will be chosen at random.

> The election process is managed by a non-voting Returns Officer nominated by the

Author: I think this was in the original draft? I don't think we discussed it in the WG at all (hopefully meaning "there were no objections"?  I don't see anything in the notes).  Definitely not imposed by NF after the fact, though.

> The election process is managed by a non-voting Returns Officer nominated by the

Author: (clarified)

outgoing Coordination Committee. For the initial election, the Returns Officer
will be nominated by the NumFOCUS Executive officer or their delegate. Elections
will be carried out every year, provided that at least one of the Coordination
Committee members has reached the end of their term or decided to step down.

Term
^^^^
Each Coordination Committee member's term runs for three years from when
the election results are finalized, except when the election was to fill a
vacancy created partway through a term. In that case, the newly-elected member’s
term runs for the remainder of the term of the person they are replacing. There
is no limit to the number of terms that a single individual can be elected for.

> For the initial election of Coordination Committee members, two seats will have

Reviewer 4: A technical question here: In the initial vote or later on if positions with different length are to be filled (say one full term position and one 1 year replacement), how do we decide who gets which seat?

Are we running independent elections for each seat? If so, can people run for both the 3 year seat and the 1 year seat at the same time?

Suggested solution: In that case, the person with the largest number of votes gets the longest available seat.

Author: My memory was that the WG sort of intentionally left this vague as something to be dealt with as part of the "implementation" of the election.  But of course we can lock it down now if we think it's important!

I think I like your suggestion but with an adjustment to allow some agency: that the person with the largest number of votes gets first "pick" at the slot.  For example, I could imagine someone seeing the outcome of the election and saying "actually, I'd rather this other person get the longest-running seat because I may want to step down next year anyway".  But I could live with that *or* your suggestion, @hamogu

Reviewer 7: How about a combo of these: The person with the largest number of votes gets the longest available seat unless the candidates mutually agree to something different.

Reviewer 4: Sounds good to me.

> For the initial election of Coordination Committee members, two seats will have
> terms of one year, one has a term of two years, and one has a term of three
> years to create a staggered set of replacements and provide continuity in the
> Coordination Committee.

Author: I have one other item I want to bring up as a suggested change, which I'm giving here as replacement wording for this particular paragraph:

```suggestion
For the initial elections of Coordination Committee members, the existing
Coordination Committee seats will come up for election in a staggered manner.
The longest-serving two committee members will come up for re-election in the
first election, the third-longest in the next year, and the shortest-serving in
the third year.  This provides continuity in the Coordination Committee while
transitioning to the staggered election model outlined in this Charter.
```
My argument for this is that it ensures that the first election does not feature a huge turnover and loss of continuity, as this is exactly what the "staggered" elections are meant to avoid.  Without this change it's possible that *no* existing CoCo members would carry over (either by choice or by vote), which would be highly problematic given the amount of institutional knowledge and unwritten tasks that currently exist in the CoCo.

(Also, while it may look like a conflict-of-interest given I'm a CoCo member, with my proposed suggestion it's not, as I'm one of the two longest-serving members, so either way I'm up in the same election.)

I know that's a bit odd to suggest this since the PR is mine, but in this case it's something that came up after the Working Group concluded (indeed, it's partly that I'm not sure the current wording reflects the *last* meeting of the Working Group), so I didn't want to force it upon the document without others having a chance to weigh in.

Reviewer 5: I find it very problematic to call it a rework of governance and the status quo when members of the new committee are hard wired basically for status quo before any voting can happen. There is already overlap ensured by current coco members serving on the finance committee, etc.
Chances that none of the current coco members would pass the voting is slim, but in case it happens that's also a valuable feedback from the community.

Author: > very problematic to call it a rework of governance 

To be clear: up until this point I don't think anyone called it a "rework of governance" - rather the goal most of the WG was thinking about was writing down what's currently true, and then improving it where writing it down makes us realize improvements are needed.  I'd say that's fully compatible with a ~50% turn-over.

Put another way: the goal had never been said to be a complete change of the entire philosophy of Project governance.  So my proposal here is aimed at helping there be incremental change with some continuity that allows a complete transformation on a 3-year timescale if needed.

Author: Oh and since it's not otherwise in this document: also the more "rework" elements are likely to happen in follow-on discussions about policy and the like. The CoCo's *original* thinking was that that's where we wanted to have some of the more dramatic re-working, by sub-groups that actually have the expertise and interest to do so.  But the point of this Charter is  that the WG felt otherwise and that there was a desire for the "foundation" to be set before any of that could be done.

Author: Sorry, should have responded to the whole thing - 

> Chances that none of the current coco members would pass the voting is slim, but in case it happens that's also a valuable feedback from the community.

I'm actually more concerned that a sizable chunk of the existing coco would *choose* not to go up for re-election. I could see scenarios where I don't depending on timing, other interested parties, etc. So I'm making this suggestion to ensure this doesn't happen all-at-once because I think with no or just a single-member overlap there would be a disastrous dropping-of-balls given the current spread of duties in the CoCo.

Reviewer 5: This hard-wiring is still extreme worrisome. The same pushback for any potential change from the current status quo as was experienced during the WG process.

Reviewer 4: I agree that this should not be hard-wired. Personally, I think some continuity is important. BUT - that should be decided by the community through elections and not by a small group making edits to this PR. If the community wants continuity, then they will vote for (some of) the current Coco members. If the community instead wants a "fresh start", they are going to vote for new people. So, don't put any restrictions into this document. Leave it up to the vote.

Reviewer 6: "Fresh start" might sound nice, but there is also a risk of fresh people making the same mistakes again because they lost the "lessons learned" from existing CoCo. There needs to be a balance between nothing ever changing and changing too fast.

Reviewer 5: so you suggest that if people wouldn't get the vote they in effect would disappear with all the "lessons learned" from the face of the Earth rather than helping the new committee, so it's better keep them hard wired?

Reviewer 6: I don't know how this will play out, really. If people are voted out, they might or might not make themselves available. For the people who vote them out, do they want to consult those they voted out in the first place? 🤷

Reviewer 3: Can we just have our cake and eat it? Write here that the hope/expectation is that some of the CoCo members will stand for the shorter-duration initial memberships?  That way we can have the vote and indeed let the community decide.

To the extent it matters, I am super thankful for those on the current committee and feel they've done a good job, even if some balls were dropped (would be far worse if I'd've been on it...). I certainly hope some will stand and I'll vote towards having some continuity.

Author: Thanks for this perspective, @hamogu and @bsipocz.  I'm swayed by your points that if most of the community really disagrees with the perspective of e.g. me, @pllim, and @mhvk that continuity is important, then that's the will of the community and that's the reality.

I still worry about the loss of continuity by *choice* of the CoCo, but as someone else pointed out, that can happen at any time really since CoCo members can resign, so this isn't a good mechanism for that.

I might offer a follow-up suggestion along the lines of @mhvk's comment to state that continuity is fine *if the community votes for it*, but I think for all elections other than the first one that's implied by the staggering process anyway.

So I'm going to withdraw my suggestion here (I'll mark it "resolved" when a round of edits happens and will plan not to include this unless there's others who pop in and say they *do* want it after all).

Reviewer 10: I would be very surprised if none of the current CoCo get elected in the first round of elections. That being said, I think it would be very self-defeating to enforce continuity here.

Reviewer: Since we are now in a new round of edits, I'll mark this as resolved without applying the suggestion as mentioned by @eteq in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#discussion_r502558084

months without prior notification (for example, due to planned leave), then the
rest of the Coordination Committee may vote to trigger an election to replace
them for the duration of their term.

Removing Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, the Voting Members may remove one or more sitting
Coordination Committee members via a single vote.

Such a vote is triggered when a Voting Member calls for one publicly on an
appropriate Project-wide communication channel, and two other active Voting
Members second the proposal.

For Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, two-thirds of the active
Voting Members must vote in support of the removal.

To avoid repeated removal votes, any individual Voting Member who has called
for, or seconded such a vote, may not call for or second a vote to remove any
other Coordination Committee member for one year from the original motion.

The Ombudsperson
----------------
The Ombudsperson represents the interests of the Astropy community by providing
an alternative point of contact for sensitive issues such as code of conduct
violations and ethical concerns. Candidates for this project role are publicly

> nominated by the Coordination Committee, after which the Coordination Committee

Reviewer 6: Since we're now lacking an Ombudsperson, does that mean we have to wait for the new CoCo to form first via election before one can be appointed?

Author: The thinking right now is that *before* this doc comes into force the old "rules" (unwritten) still apply, which means we can put someone in the role.  Fortunately we have a candidate which I'll be sending a note about later today, so I think this will be in place *before* the election (fortunately).

appointment, the Coordination Committee will temporarily take over the
responsibilities of the Ombudsperson, should the need arise.

The Voting Members
------------------

Role
^^^^
The Voting Members are the group of trusted individuals who operate the Astropy
Project on behalf of the community. They have authority over the Astropy
Project’s technical resources, including the Astropy Project website itself, the
Astropy GitHub organization and repositories, the issue tracker, and all Astropy
communication channels. In practice, much of this authority is passed to the
Coordination Committee via the voting processes described in this Charter.

They also assume many roles required to achieve the Project's goals, especially
those that require a high level of trust. Collectively, they make decisions that
shape the future of the Project.

Voting Members are expected to act as role models for the community and
custodians of the Project, on behalf of the community and all those who rely on
Astropy. They will act as representatives of the Astropy Project, where
necessary, including in online discussions or at official Astropy events.

> Powers

Reviewer 8: Or what about just "Rights"?

^^^^^^

> Voting Members may participate in formal votes on:

Reviewer 6: I think there needs to be a blank space for the list to render properly.
```suggestion
Voting Members may participate in formal votes on:

```

* adding new Voting Members,
* removing Voting Members,
* electing Coordination Committee members,
* removing Coordination Committee members,
* appointment or removal of the Ombudsperson,
* changes to this Charter,
* other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is

>   appropriate.

Reviewer 8: In the previous bullet list the first letter of each item was capitalized, and here it isn't.  Personally I prefer this style, but I'm not sure which is more correct.

Reviewer 6: Maybe we need @lglattly to have a look... 😸

Reviewer 11: I'm not funded to work on the current grant right now, but hopefully in the near future this will be in scope for me and I'd be happy to take a look! Thanks for the heads up -- I'll add this to my future-copy editing running list!

Reviewer 11: Oh and to answer this question, the [Astropy Narrative Style Guide](https://docs.astropy.org/en/latest/development/style-guide.html) doesn't have a specific guideline for bullet lists at this point (I could add one in the future), but I always capitalize the first letter of each item. If this looks strange in this particular case with the commas, I would either leave the commas off and do a list without punctuation, or I would put periods at the end of each item. Either periods or no periods in a bullet list is fine, as long as you are consistent within the list, and strive for consistency within all lists in the document as a whole (taking into account that some lists may be single word items in which periods would look strange and others may be sentence-long items which call for punctuation).

Reviewer: Fixed to be always capitalized

The mechanism, timeline, and criteria for a decisive vote are specified in the
respective sections of this document in the first six cases and by the
Coordination Committee in the last case.

Membership
^^^^^^^^^^
Voting Members of the Astropy Project must demonstrate:
* a good grasp of the philosophy of the Astropy Project,
* a solid track record of being constructive and helpful,
* significant contributions to the Project's goals, in any form,
* a willingness to dedicate time to improving the Project,
* a willingness to recruit, train, and nominate new team members.

Voting Membership acknowledges sustained and valuable efforts that align well
with the philosophy and the goals of the Astropy Project.

Initial Membership
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Anyone who satisfies any of the following criteria at the date of acceptance of
this APE will be invited to be in the first group of Voting Members:

* has a named role in the project and has participated in an Astropy
  coordination meeting in the last two years,
* has a named role in the project and has regularly participated in Astropy
  telecons (e.g., co-working telecon, spectroscopy sprint, Astropy Learn

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Reviewer 4: It says "e.g.", so as it stands, the list is not exhaustive. However, how do we define the list in the beginning? For that, a complete list would be needed. I suggest that we make a list of people that would be initial voting members based on these criteria. We email that list to the community and say (in nicer wording) "Did we forget you? If so, we're sorry. Please leave comment / open PR here." From there, the current Coco can approve or deny, using the criteria here. Yes, that's in some way the Coco choosing the electorate, which is not a good thing in general, but I can't come up with a better way that's manageable. It's a chicken-and-egg problem. We (the most active members) should also monitor that list. Self-nominations for membership will just get the loudest, not the most involved to sign up. Thus, we should look at that list and say: "Oh, person A from telecon XYZ singed up. Looks like we forgot to add the people working on XYZ to the initial list. Who else participated in XYZ and should be added, even if they were not on the initial list and did not self-nominate for membership?"

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Author: To clarify the idea from the WG was that we initialize the list using a not-perfect, but probably good enough heuristic, which is what this list is supposed to be.  Then there would be around where those people vote in other voting members.  The WG basically spent many hours trying to come up with a metric that would work without reaching consensus (or, I believe, even majority-vote agreement), so something more flexible like that was thought to be the safer way to go. 

So that would effectively be the same as @hamogu's proposal here, but with a body broader than the CoCo able to make that determination (it would include the CoCo though, since of course all current members meet these criteria).

At some point someone (@Cadair ?  Or maybe @astrofrog? Or maybe it was @bsipocz?) tabulated who would be in the initial set based on these criteria, and a few alternative versions, and it was always the same people plus-or-minus one or two (who would presumably get in on the first voting round anyway).  

(Note this connects to https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#issuecomment-704723190)

(But I agree the dev telecon would be included on this list!)

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Reviewer 5: You might recall an email in which I asked for a schedule reshuffle about this topic but only met with passive aggressive and exclusionary comments from two and the ask got ignored, while similar asks were always honoured in all previous meetings. So no, it wasn't me. 

And yes, it does matter what is in this initial requirement list as it puts down a baseline of what is a minimal level of involvement required.

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Author: > You might recall an email  

I do not recall that email, and I'm not confident that everyone else in the WG interprets the events the same way, but I'm sorry that happened to you regardless. I don't think that's especially germain to this particular thread, though.

> And yes, it does matter what is in this initial requirement list as it puts down a baseline of what is a minimal level of involvement required.

That is not the intent as I recall the discussion in the WG - it is meant to set an initial list and then that initial list of members can accept others based on the wording in the "membership" section that's just above this one. (@Cadair may correct me if I misunderstood as I believe it was him who proposed this?)

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Reviewer 10: I think it's very important that the initial bootstrapping of the voting members doesn't set an ongoing precedent, and the wording should be strengthened if it is being interpreted that way. Future decisions on membership should be made solely on the grounds of the membership section.

It's obviously very important that we get this right, but it is a difficult problem to solve, balancing fairness and simplicity. I think the most important criteria for judging this section is **does everyone selected by this set of criteria meet the criteria for membership above**. If there is anyone being selected by these criteria that doesn't then they need updating, however, if they don't then they are serving their purpose to get us over the bootstrapping issue, and from acceptance of this document onwards the only thing that should matter is the membership criteria.

>   telecon) in the last two years,

Reviewer: To avoid any arguments about this I updated the rules to avoid anything vague - see also https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#issuecomment-769284716

* has commit rights to at least one repository in the astropy GitHub

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer: I agree that we shouldn't include some of the few random repositories that ended up in the organisation but aren't actually maintained by the project (and we should probably tidy this up at some point)

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Author: I agree with this in principle except that I thought we (although by "we" I thought it was either @astrofrog, @bsipocz, or @Cadair !) checked this during the WG meeting and it turns out that applying these criteria don't yield anyone particularly unexpected - i.e. making small changes like this wouldn't actually change the list of names.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: it was certainly not me, I would have pointed this out there and then had I had the chance. 

And even if it doesn't change much, it is very unfair to count write access a subset of the affiliated but not coordinated packages while ignore the other 40 ones. It is possible that people in the WG didn't know that there are non astropy project packages under the astropy github organization when voted for this phrasing. I think everyone should be aware of that structure as one of the fundamentals of how astropy works, but of course that wasn't a criteria to be part of the WG.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 3: If one aims for work for astropy, I guess one should also include the `liberfa` repositories. That might add one or two for the initial list.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: What about wcslib and cfitsio and numpy then? 

If astropy officially maintains liberfa (similarly to the coordinated affiliated packages) and thus it should be treated differently than the other dependencies, then it should be moved under the astropy github org and treated as part of the project.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: (if it's not clear, I would be 👍 to make that move, just would like to see the consistency by having it under the same parent org)

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 3: `liberfa` is definitely primarily a spin-off of astropy - and, yes, I think people working on other packages to make sure that they interoperate with astropy should count too.

Anyway, rereading I see this was really just about the initial list, and the people working at liberfa are mostly already on that for other reasons, so perhaps somewhat irrelevant.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 8: I assumed liberfa was under the astropy organization already.  Shouldn't it be?

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: I feel if liberfa maintainership comes with astropy voting rights, then it should indeed live in the astropy organization. I know that future members will be voted in independently of this current list, but even then if someone is very active in an upstream library, it shouldn't really be enough to get the voting right, activity within the astropy project is what should count.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: (and thus I think liberfa belongs to the astropy org than the current, random selection of affiliated packages that reside in astropy for various reasons)

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 3: @bsipocz - indeed, in terms of relevance liberfa belongs in astropy more than some of the random things on github. That said, I see little use in moving it to the astropy umbrella.

But I regret somewhat bringing it up. Overall, I think it actually is better to not try to nail down what constitutes real contribution in this APE, or at least not for beyond the initial list. In that sense, "contribute meaningfully" should perhaps be good enough, as it is voted on anyway.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 5: I'm very happy that you brought this up though, as I think I would prefer less flowery language all over and more concrete examples. E.g "contribute meaningfully" is very subjective and can lead easily that friends get voted in just because they are nominated and no one cares or dares to speak up, while people outside of the usual network will have a much harder time to get recognition for a sustained, good level of contributions (happened in so many cases with the current roles setup).

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 3: @bsipocz - point about concrete examples taken - and very much agreed with. So maybe the solution here is then to make clear that the list of concrete examples is not meant to be exhaustive (for contributors beyond the initial list, i.e., those who get voted on).

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Author: Definitely open to more concrete examples if that would be helpful, and agreed something about it not being exhaustive makes sense.  Please suggest some concrete examples and I can try to integrate them if others agree they are valid!

That said, the point the WG consensus was getting at here is that the underlying problem is that there is *no*  objective way the WG could agree on to measure this, because it's too hard to map any objective metric (e.g. "commits" or even "hours") onto anything anyone was willing to say was any more objective than this scheme.

So the idea here is that the voting members are not voting their "friends" or "people they want to hang out with", but rather the voting process is saying "people who meet those criteria at the top of the membership section should be voting members, and we are voting that, to the best of our knowledge, this person has met those criteria".  Is there some way that nuance could be made more clear?

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer 10: See my comment on the thread above as to my thoughts on how to judge this list of criteria. If there are active repos under the astropy org which lead to people being selected by this process which don't meet the criteria in the membership section above then it needs reworking, otherwise it's serving it's purpose.

>   organization and has actively used those commit rights in the last two years.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#issuecomment-769284716 for new wording for the rules for voting members - I now explicitly say it has to be the core repo, coordinated repos, infrastructure, or learn repos.

Add New Voting Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Anyone can apply to become a Voting Member by providing evidence of meeting the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Anyone can become a Voting Member by providing evidence of meeting the
```
"apply" sounds like "self-application" which is not what the next sentence says.

requirements laid out in the Membership section above. Both self-nominations and
nominations by others are allowed. The Voting Members are expected to make their
decisions based on the candidate’s adherence to the membership criteria, above.
The name of the nominee will be known to Voting Members but will not be shared
outside Voting Members and the Coordination Committee unless the nominee becomes
a Voting Member.

The procedure for voting to add new Voting Members is:

* The Coordination Committee and Ombudsperson receive each nomination, check
  that it is factually accurate, that the nominated person accepts the
  nomination, and that their record of community activity adheres to the Code of
  Conduct.
* Once a nomination is accepted by the Coordination Committee, the Coordination
  Committee will initiate a vote among active Voting Members. The voting will be
  open for at least two weeks and will conclude within four weeks of the
  nomination being accepted. To successfully gain an appointment as a Voting
  Member, the nominee must receive at least four positive votes, as long as that

>   constitutes a majority of those voting.

Reviewer 4: I see why this is written with fast turn-around in mind. However, is that practical? Do we really expect anyone to organize voting once a month? Assume someone is nominated on the first of the month, voting would have to happen in that month (sending out email to all voting members, set up online voting system, look at outcome, inform community of result). That's up to 12 votes / year! Who is going to do that work? We don't turn around that fast on most of the PRs!

I suggest annually or at most twice per year, so tat you vote for a whole bunch of people at the same time (that's similar to what the IAU does). Alternatively, you could become a member if X (e.g. 4) current members second the application (similar to AAS). That means that other project members don't have the chance to vote someone down (since there won't be a voting process and they might learn about the application only after the fact), but it's much more lightweight than having a full election every time.

Author: I see your point here, but I think your "alternative" is pretty close to the intent of the WG.  If I'm understanding you right, the proposal in the document is to do your alternative but have a period in which people other than the "seconds" might be able to weigh in.  But they are completely free to abstain, in which case it plays out exactly like your alternative. That makes it almost as lightweight since the only added bit is setting up an online vote (which for a yes/no is really easy to do these days once you've set it up for the first time).

That said I take your point that maybe even in that model there should be a limited number per year or something. Maybe it makes sense to change the timeline to something like "4 weeks from when the nominations are announced" but say something like "announcement of nominations may be delayed by up to 6 months to ensure there are not too many elections"?  That way it's flexible enough to *allow* this without *mandating* it?

Reviewer 4: Yes, that sounds good to me. I just want to avoid any tight deadlines that we put on ourselves. In the interest of sustainability, it's good to have the option to reduce workload by bundling a bunch of elections, but - as you say - if everything is fine, we can have them more frequently.

Reviewer: See https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#issuecomment-769284716 (and the PR diff itself) for a slightly different wording which I think avoids any ambiguity

* The candidate will be informed promptly at the close of voting by a
  Coordination Committee member. If the vote is not affirmative, the
  Coordination Committee will provide feedback to the nominee.

Term and Active/Inactive Status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Voting Members have no term or term limits. Voting Members who have stopped
contributing are encouraged to declare themselves as "inactive.” Those who have

> not made any significant contribution for a long period may be asked to move

Reviewer 4: I think 2 years is a good period (reviewed annually, so in practice might be almost three years).

> not made any significant contribution for a long period may be asked to move

Author: Good point, 2 years seems reasonable since that's the LTS window.

> not made any significant contribution for a long period may be asked to move

Reviewer: Changed to 2 years

themselves to the “inactive” category by the Coordination Committee. If no
response is received, the Coordination Committee may automatically change a

> Voting Member’s status to inactive. To record and honor their contributions,

Reviewer 4: What is a member never does anything for the project, except to reply to the Coco "I'm still active"? Should they be retired eventually? I'm not sure that's going to be a problem in practice, so I'm OK with not addressing it now, but I wanted to raise the possibility.

Reviewer 12: In Debian, people who are no longer contribute, can request "Emeritus" status, which sounds more positive than "inactive". I would also propose a similar to Debian: If someone does not contribute within some period (1y?), the CC should try to reach them and ask whether they want to get this status.

Reviewer 5: I also raised the desire to have the emeritus status for the roles here: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-project/issues/136#issuecomment-693708410, with the motivation of the roles page to reflect the actual reality.

Author: Good points - I agree "emeritus" is a better term regardless!

As for the "never does anything except reply", if I recall correctly the WG discussed the broader question of kicking people out and decided that it's probably better to let people be self-reporting, because we have to rely on that *anyway* in many cases. So someone who constantly replies "yes I am active" may actually have a good reason, and implicitly they are trustworthy be getting into the voting membership in the first place  (note that means not *everyone* has to trust them, but enough people to make it there in the first place).

That said, the removal clause is there for someone that a supermajority agrees is abusing that privledge. So the thinking is that this is how the case @hamogu described would be dealt with.

Author: (And I think emeritus status for *roles* is another interesting discussion to consider, but is not quite the same as emeritus status in a voting membership sense, since some people might be emeritus in one role but not another and therefore still active in the project as a whole.)

Reviewer: Changed to emeritus

inactive Voting Members will continue to be listed. Inactive Voting Members are
not able to participate in votes.

Removing Voting Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the
Voting Members against their will. A vote must be held to remove a Voting
Member. Such a vote is triggered by a motion made by an active Voting Member,
which must be seconded by an additional Voting Member. The vote must conclude

> no more than four weeks after the motion is seconded. Removal requires approval

Reviewer 4: Similarly to the above, I think four weeks is a very tight deadline. It's probably OK here because this is going to be a rare case, but I don't see urgency. If someone really wrecks havoc, the coco can still remove github privileges related to that account immediately and then there is little harm if that person is still a voting member till the next vote is called.

Author: I think the intent of all deadlines is that we don't want it to hang over someone's head forever.  It's like how the US Constitution specifies a "fair and speedy trial".  But to your point it does *not* say "within 4 weeks", so I guess these could be changed to something more nebulous like "as soon as reasonably possible"?

Reviewer 5: I would prefer to keep concrete times in rather than the vaguenesses. Whether that is 4 weeks or 3 months, I don't mind. 
But "speedy", "regular", etc is very vague as subject to subjective interpretation which I think is avoidable.

Reviewer 3: Can we combine the votes for CoCo with those for new members, etc.? Once per year may be too infrequent, but if there were also a "midterms", would that be good enough?  A month or two after each release might be a sensible time.

Author: I like @mhvk's suggestion here, but one of the intents in this document was to *not* lock in all the details of the election right now.  For example, the exact platform for the voting and how hard it is might influence the answer to this. So I see the intent is setting bounds and guidelines that are acceptable without specifying all the details such that the APE has to be amended because, say, a certain voting platform suddenly goes out-of-business. So I think it makes sense to change the text to *allow* less frequent voting, but not *require* it or specify a specific cadence too particularly.

That said, on the removal process, the WG was thinking that if there are votes to remove people many times a year something has gone terribly wrong already! So unlike adding new members where it makes sense to roll them together because that may be a relatively frequent occurrence if the Project is healthy, the hope is that removal happens very rarely if ever, and hence is worth a specific vote because it should be treated as a serious occasion.  So I think removals ideally wouldn't be rolled into other votes (whereas adding people or additional votes we haven't covered could indeed be rolled into a twice-a-year deadline).

So that makes me want to stick with either 4 weeks or 3 months for this clause, assuming the "voting members" bit is updated to allow 6-month gaps?

Reviewer 3: Good point that removals should not be lumped together with other votes. A bit more time than 4 weeks still seems sensible.

Reviewer 4: I'm OK with changing "4 weeks" to "3 months". Nothing stops us to call that vote faster if possible, but if our preferred voting provider just went out of business, two Coco members had babies and third one dies in a plane crash (or, to cite a much less likely nightmare scenario, a global pandemic wrecks havok on everyones schedule), then we can stretch it to 3 months.

Reviewer: Changed to 3 months

by two-thirds of all active Voting Members at the time the motion is made. The
motion, second, and vote will be held in private. Removal under this provision
will be reflected by updating the list of Voting Members.

It may be necessary for the Ombudsperson and the Coordination Committee to
remove a Voting Member for violations of the Code of Conduct. In this case, the
Coordination Committee and Ombudsperson will work together to make this
decision.

Approving and Modifying This Charter
------------------------------------

> This document was submitted following the process in APE1_, and the normal APE

Author: You know, I'm not sure if we've ever been explicit about that.  But you're right that does seem more consistent with PEPs, if nothing else!

> This document was submitted following the process in APE1_, and the normal APE

Reviewer: Fixed

acceptance procedures will be followed. The Coordination Committee at the time
of submitting this APE are all co-authors and therefore will not override any
consensus of the community on accepting the final version.

Changes to this Charter after it has been accepted should follow the
modification process in APE1_, with the exception that the final approval of the
modification requires approval by a two-thirds vote of the Voting Members rather
than approval by the Coordination Committee.

Attribution and Acknowledgments
-------------------------------
The format and some of the structures outlined in this document are heavily
inspired by the Python Language Governance structure

> (`PEP13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/>`_), the YT Project's Team

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
(`PEP 13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/>`_), the YT Project's Team
```

Infrastructure
(`YTEP 1776 <https://ytep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/YTEPs/YTEP-1776.html>`_), and
earlier less-formal descriptions of the Astropy governance.

.. _APE1: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE1.rst

Branches and Pull Requests
==========================
N/A

Implementation
==============
This Charter enters into force upon this APE being accepted (see the last
section of the description). At that time the ``GOVERNANCE.md`` file in the
astropy repo should be updated to point to this document.

Backward Compatibility
======================
This Charter supersedes previous un-codified governance understandings, but does
not serve to invalidate the APE process or any other processes or policies that
pre-date it and do not conflict.

Alternatives
============
The Astropy Governance Working Group discussed a wide range of alternatives on
both the broad scope of Project governance and details of this Charter. It is
not practical to summarize that in the text of this APE, but the Working Group's

> running notes provide an excellent starting point for this discussion.

Reviewer 8: Link?

Reviewer 6: To preserve history, the doc needs to be locked first before linking.

Author: It's currently only open for view via link, but WG members can edit it.  Is that what you meant @pllim, or do you think we should also lock it from the WG members?

Reviewer 6: Hmm... I was thinking about permanent, but I'll leave it to your discretion.

Author: Oh but for *immediate* purposes if others want to look, the link is here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XsJCQDm1EBWm2w2yDbohWw2HhMAO_-YhnOMhBsNV82I/edit?usp=sharing

Reviewer: I added this link to the document, since I don't think we plan to publish it under some other platform

users, and even potential participants in the broader astronomical and
scientific software community. All have a vested interest in the success of the
Project, so all governance in the end belongs to this community in its entirety.
The governance Charter described below provides levels of delegation of that
authority, particularly to the Voting Members and the Coordination Committee.

The Coordination Committee
--------------------------

Composition
^^^^^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four or five
members (this number will be decided by vote at the same time as the first
Coordination Committee election). The
Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the Astropy 
community.  Hence, it should aim for diversity in geography, skill set (both 
astronomy and developer), background, and so on. Furthermore, unless it would 
be short of candidates otherwise, it should not have more than one member from 
any particular employer. The Ombudsperson (described in
Section 4) and the Coordination Committee will work to maintain this composition
following the processes laid out in this Charter.

> Role
> ^^^^^^^

Reviewer 13: nitpick
```suggestion
Role
^^^^
```

decision regarding what constitutes a conflict of interest is determined by the
Ombudsperson in accordance with the conflict of interest policy. Passing
decisions require a strict majority of non-abstaining Coordination Committee
members.

Whenever possible, the Coordination Committee's deliberations shall be held in
public in a manner that permits discussion and comments from the community.
Final decisions made by the Coordination Committee will be published in a
publicly visible location.

Electing the Coordination Committee
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Coordination Committee election is held annually to fill any vacant seats.
Notice of the election must be posted via the Project’s standard communication
channels (reaching all active members) at least one month before the election begins.
The election consists of two phases, each lasting two weeks:

* Phase 1, Nominations: Candidates will be nominated and confirm their interest
  in serving. Candidates can be nominated by anyone, including themselves, and
  do not have to be Voting Members to be nominated. Candidates should provide
  a brief statement in support of their candidacy.

> * Phase 2, Voting: Each Voting Member can vote for zero or more of the

Reviewer 13: Minor, but could `Voting Member` be `[Voting Member](#Voting_Member)` (or whatever is syntactically correct) so it links to the definition below?  I've been reading linearly, and I arrived here before learning what a voting member is.  I wasn't clear how anonymous voting could be managed before scrolling down further.

Reviewer 13: `Voting Member <#Voting_Member>`_, maybe?  I'm not sure exactly how this will get rendered.

Author: Good idea!  Was a bit more complex than I thought, but done now.

years to create a staggered set of replacements and provide continuity in the
Coordination Committee. The candidate with the largest number of votes gets the 
longest available seat and the smallest the shortest, unless the new committee 
mutually agree to a different allocation.

Vacancies
^^^^^^^^^
Coordination Committee members may resign their position at any time.

Whenever there is a vacancy during the regular Coordination Committee term an
election must take place.

If a Coordination Committee member cannot be contacted for longer than two
months without prior notification (for example, due to planned leave), then the
rest of the Coordination Committee may vote to trigger an election to replace
them for the duration of their term.

Removing Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, the Voting Members may remove one or more sitting
Coordination Committee members via a single vote.

Such a vote is triggered when a Voting Member calls for one publicly on an
appropriate Project-wide communication channel, and two other active Voting
Members second the proposal.

For Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, two-thirds of the active

> Voting Members must vote in support of the removal.

Reviewer 13: does the to-be-removed member get to participate in this vote?  It probably doesn't matter, but it may be worth clarifying

Author: Good point! I think they should be included if they are already a voting member since they got to vote for themselves to get in in the first place. So how about:
```suggestion
For Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, two-thirds of the active
Voting Members (where the count *includes* the member being voted on if they
are a voting member) must vote in support of the removal.
```
? (The complexity here is that it's not guaranteed that a CoCo member is a voting member.  I suspect they nearly always will be, but it's not *required*)

Author: oops, this suggestion is out of date now, but I re-did it in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#pullrequestreview-580841470 , so that can be merged last-minute if need be

responsibilities of the Ombudsperson, should the need arise.

The Voting Members
------------------

Role
^^^^
The Voting Members are the group of trusted individuals who operate the Astropy
Project on behalf of the community. They have authority over the Astropy
Project’s technical resources, including the Astropy Project website itself, the
Astropy GitHub organization and repositories, the issue tracker, and all Astropy
communication channels. In practice, much of this authority is passed to the
Coordination Committee via the voting processes described in this Charter.

They also assume many roles required to achieve the Project's goals, especially
those that require a high level of trust. Collectively, they make decisions that
shape the future of the Project.

Voting Members are expected to act as role models for the community and
custodians of the Project, on behalf of the community and all those who rely on
Astropy. They will act as representatives of the Astropy Project, where
necessary, including in online discussions or at official Astropy events.

Responsibilities and Rights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Voting Members may and should participate in formal votes on:

> * Adding new Voting Members
> * Removing Voting Members
> * Electing Coordination Committee members
> * Removing Coordination Committee members
> * Appointment or removal of the Ombudsperson
> * Changes to this Charter
> * Other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
1. Adding new Voting Members
2. Removing Voting Members
3. Electing Coordination Committee members
4. Removing Coordination Committee members
5. Appointment or removal of the Ombudsperson
6. Changes to this Charter
7. Other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is
```
suggest using a numbered list since the next paragraph refers to this by number.

  appropriate.

The mechanism, timeline, and criteria for a decisive vote are specified in the
respective sections of this document in the first six cases and by the

> Coordination Committee in the last case.

Reviewer 13: technical suggestion: the bulleted list above should be a numbered list since they are referred to by number

  that it is factually accurate, that the nominated person accepts the
  nomination, and that their record of community activity adheres to the Code of
  Conduct.
* Once a nomination is accepted by the Coordination Committee, the Coordination
  Committee will put it to a vote among active Voting Members. Votes for adding
  voting members will be carried out at most twice a year to avoid too many
  elections. The voting dates will be announced with at least four weeks notice,
  and additional nominations will be accepted until two weeks before the
  election date. The voting will be open for at least two weeks. To successfully
  gain an appointment as a Voting Member, the nominee must receive at least four
  positive votes, as long as that constitutes a majority of those voting.
* The candidate will be informed promptly at the close of voting by a
  Coordination Committee member. If the vote is not affirmative, the
  Coordination Committee will provide feedback to the nominee.

At least one round of voting for adding voting members should be carried out before
the initial election of the Coordination Committee.

Term and Active/Emeritus Status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Voting Members have no term or term limits. Voting Members who have stopped
> contributing are encouraged to declare themselves as "emeritus.” Those who have
> not made any significant contribution for two years may be asked to move
> themselves to the “emeritus” category by the Coordination Committee. If no
> response is received, the Coordination Committee may automatically change a
> Voting Member’s status to emeritus. To record and honor their contributions,
> emeritus Voting Members will continue to be listed. emeritus Voting Members are
> not able to participate in votes.

Reviewer 13: I italicized instead of scare-quoting the *emeritus* references.  At least, the quotes need to be made consistent.
```suggestion
Voting Members have no term or term limits. Voting Members who have stopped
contributing are encouraged to declare themselves as *emeritus*. Those who have
not made any significant contribution for two years may be asked to move
themselves to the *emeritus* category by the Coordination Committee. If no
response is received, the Coordination Committee may automatically change a
Voting Member’s status to *emeritus*. To record and honor their contributions,
*emeritus* Voting Members will continue to be listed. *Emeritus* Voting Members are
not able to participate in votes.
```

acceptance procedures will be followed. The Coordination Committee at the time
of submitting this APE are all co-authors and therefore will not override any
consensus of the community on accepting the final version.

Changes to this Charter after it has been accepted should follow the
modification process in `APE 1`_, with the exception that the final approval of the
modification requires approval by a two-thirds vote of the Voting Members rather
than approval by the Coordination Committee.

Attribution and Acknowledgments
-------------------------------
The format and some of the structures outlined in this document are heavily
inspired by the Python Language Governance structure
(`PEP 13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/>`_), the YT Project's Team
Infrastructure
(`YTEP 1776 <https://ytep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/YTEPs/YTEP-1776.html>`_), and
earlier less-formal descriptions of the Astropy governance.

.. _APE 1: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE1.rst

Branches and Pull Requests
==========================
N/A

Implementation
==============
This Charter enters into force upon this APE being accepted (see the last

> section of the description). At that time the ``GOVERNANCE.md`` file in the

Reviewer 13: This file is .rst, not .md - should this be `GOVERNANCE.rst`?

Author: ```suggestion
section of the description). At that time the ``GOVERNANCE.rst`` file in the
```
Good catch!

which aimed to both codify existing informal governance rules as well as update
them with new ideas that are consistent with the philosophy of and vision for
the Astropy project.

Ultimate Authority: The Astropy Community
-----------------------------------------
The Astropy Project derives its authority from the whole community - developers,
users, and even potential participants in the broader astronomical and
scientific software community. All have a vested interest in the success of the
Project, so all governance in the end belongs to this community in its entirety.
The governance Charter described below provides levels of delegation of that
authority, particularly to the `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ and the
Coordination Committee.

The Coordination Committee
--------------------------

Composition
^^^^^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four or five
members (this number will be decided by vote at the same time as the first
Coordination Committee election). The
Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the Astropy
community.  Hence, it should aim for diversity in geography, skill set (both

> astronomy and developer), background, and so on. Furthermore, unless it would

Reviewer 5: > skill set (both astronomy and developer)
This is too vague, either define a skill set enough to be on the coco or remove it. There was discussion above where it was preferred by many of us to remove all the vague language like this from this document. 

Similarly background, what type of background do you refer to, how that definition translate for a global project? How do you propose to require a disclosal of background info during an election? If data is not collected, and it's not disclosed how do you plan do aim for diversity along that angle?

Reviewer 7: I agree, this is too vague. Here's my proposed re-write, which just cuts most of it:
`The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four or five members (this number will be decided by vote at the same time as the first Coordination Committee election). Unless it would be short of candidates otherwise, it should not have more than one member from any particular employer.`

Author: I'm not thrilled about that change. the wording in the current text was an attempt to synthesize a wide range of opinions in this thread: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#discussion_r502554623 .  I agree it's a bit vague, and impossible to set as a specific rule, but to me that was the point: these are things that are *impossible* to define fully, but making an attempt to account for them helps improve things. There was enough discussion on this both in the WG and the thread I linked above to make me thing it was important enough to write in there as an explicit desire, even if the exact definitions are not pinned down.

That said, if several of the people in that exchange (@mhvk, @hamogu, @adrn, @embray, @Cadair ) are fine with @kelle's proposed change, I'm ok with it too!  I just don't want to silence those voices at the last minute, since that's what led to this wording in the first place.

Reviewer 5: I'm happy with the rephrase. 

And can also be happy if someone has a more concrete definition of skills and background, but I think it's super difficult and has to answer my question above to be effective and useful in practice.

Reviewer 5: >but making an attempt to account for them helps improve things. 

Saying vague things with no consequences doesn't improve things. How do you propose to take background into account. What did you even mean by background here? If you don't collect data, how would you think it can be taken into account during an election?

Reviewer 4: I think there is value in expressing intent, even if there are no consequences. It's quite common to express some intent even if the actual rules of the document don't spell out how that is achieved in detail (e.g. from a well-known text in the history of England "Know that we, out of reverence for God and for the salvation of our soul"). So I like it as long as the text makes clear that this is the *intent* not an enforceable rule. I think "it should aim" captures that quite well.
Since it's only an intent and not an enforceable rule it's OK not to collect the background, etc for statistical purposes. We say "we would like to have diversity and here are some examples" and not "we have a watertight definition of all axes of diversity".

However, if other people strongly disagree, I don't want to hold up APE0 over this. Getting the rules set is much more important.

Reviewer 5: I don't think that the vagueness of a 800 year old document is relevant for an APE, which should be more about setting the rules, with actionable items.

Let's say there are X number of candidates. And a document that say we aim for diversity in background. What do you know, ideally have to know, about them to decide about your votes with a decision that aims to take diversity in background into consideration?  If you don't know any extra info about their background, or even a definition what you mean by background, then how can you even pretend to have an _intent_ for that diversity, beyond feeling good that the governance document is so great that it even covered this corner of unfairness and bias (albeit with nothing actionable).

It's the good old "women and underrepresented minorities are encouraged to apply", then business as usual, with all the shortlisted people are white male from US coast universities. The call had that phrase carrying the value, after all, they did everything they could (and then gender and race are probably easier to quantify for an application/nomination than "background" and "diverse skill set both astronomy and developer")

My original questions are still unanswered:
> what type of background do you refer to, how that definition translate for a global project? How do you propose to require a disclosal of background info during an election? If data is not collected, and it's not disclosed how do you plan do aim for diversity along that angle?

Reviewer 4: >  what type of background do you refer to, how that definition translate for a global project? How do you propose to require a disclosal of background info during an election? If data is not collected, and it's not disclosed how do you plan do aim for diversity along that angle?

I would suggest to allow each candidate to write a CV / statement if they want. In that statement, they can disclose whatever they want but don't have to. Some things will be more obvious (geography) then others (socio-economic background). It's then up to the voters do do with that information whatever they want. In practice, most people who will stand to vote for Coco elections are probably reasonably well known to many in the community so we know from past actions about their skillset.

However, none of this *has* to be in the APE0 if it's contentions. So, let's leave that out.

Reviewer 3: The whole long thread was started because there was a worry that CoCo would become a cabal, perhaps East Coast, dominated by STScI and other institutes that are able to pay their staff to work on astropy. But looking at it again it does seem a bit of a fool's errand to try to spell out the diversity we are aiming for, and even more to try to nail that down further.

I like @hamogu's suggestion of explicitly asking for a statement. How about:
```
The Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the Astropy community, and candidates are encouraged to include in their statement how they will contribute to the further diversification of ideas.
```
(last part directly stolen from my university's obligatory sentence -- I actually always liked that because it is spells out why diversity is good for the university).

But I'm also happy with just removing it altogether.

Reviewer: Just another vote that I think it's fine to remove this - @bsipocz has a point that unless we actually do some kind of affirmative action or select the CoCo with entrofy (!) saying that we 'should' aim for this diversity doesn't actually mean anything as there is no enforcement. The only thing that would have an impact is if we actually included hard rules of e.g. no more than one CoCo member per continent, or some quotas on gender diversity (which is a minefield in itself given that gender is not a binary property).

@mhvk - I'd hope that the CoCo can be allowed to be more diverse in some ways than the astropy community - a sentence like what you suggests could actually be used to prevent too many underrepresented people on the CoCo if they are underrepresented in the astropy community!

Author: It ended up in a slightly different thread, but the consensus seemed to be pretty solidly behind the reword to what @kelle suggested, so I know when I'm out-voted :wink:

public in a manner that permits discussion and comments from the community.
Final decisions made by the Coordination Committee will be published in a
publicly visible location.

Electing the Coordination Committee
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
A Coordination Committee election is held annually to fill any vacant seats.
Notice of the election must be posted via the Project’s standard communication
channels (reaching all active members) at least one month before the election
begins. The election consists of two phases, each lasting two weeks:

* Phase 1, Nominations: Candidates will be nominated and confirm their interest
  in serving. Candidates can be nominated by anyone, including themselves, and
  do not have to be `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ to be nominated.
  Candidates should provide a brief statement in support of their candidacy.
* Phase 2, Voting: Each `Voting Member <votingmembers>`_ can vote for zero or
  more of the candidates, up to the number of candidates. Voting is performed
  anonymously. Candidates are ranked by the total number of votes they receive.
  If a tie occurs, it may be resolved by mutual agreement among the candidates,

>   or else the winner will be chosen at random.

Author: The Working Group agreed that in the interest of keeping this document as simple as possible, the idea was to not prescribe implementation details like this.

The election process is managed by a non-voting Returns Officer nominated by
the outgoing Coordination Committee, although the process (specific choice of
web site, etc) can be set up by the Coordination Committee or their delegates.
For the initial election, the Returns Officer will be nominated by the NumFOCUS
Executive Officer. Elections will be carried out every year, provided that at
least one of the Coordination Committee members has reached the end of their
term or decided to step down.

Term
^^^^
Each Coordination Committee member's term runs for three years from when

> the election results are finalized, except when the election was to fill a

Reviewer 5: > except when the election was to fill a
vacancy created partway through a term.

why there is this distinction for having a second-class citizen election and "normal" ones? A system where the two longest sitting members are up for reelection seems much fairer.  There is no reasoning documented in the running notes about this.

Reviewer 7: I am not positive, but I think this so that 1) the terms of everyone else on the CoCo don't change just because there is a vacancy and 2) the terms stay staggered. Otherwise, if elections were based on relative time served, if there was an unexpected vacancy, everyone else's terms on the CoCo would change. You could not change their terms, but then you'd end up filling two seats at once rather than one seat at a time and losing the desired continuity. I think this is mostly following the US model of "Special Elections" to fill vacant House and Senate seats: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_special_elections_to_the_United_States_House_of_Representatives

Author: Yes, @kelle's explanation is my recollection as well. If we want fixed-length terms this is the only way to ensure that staggering continues perpetually.

I didn't remember until I looked it up but I see it in the WG notes under "Restagger term length if it gets de-synced." - it looks like there was a vote unanimous with one abstention with this general idea, and then it was noted specifically as a change that went into the final vote to approve the document.

Reviewer 5: Should all our things be based on the US? Naive question I know, as many of you apparently think yes is the only acceptable answer.
E.g. having an early election doesn't mean a new government has a shorter term than normal.

I here just simply wonder, why someone voted in, in an otherwise fully valid election has shorter terms, just because they are filling in the place of someone else. It will be filling one or two seats yearly anyways.

Otherwise, this document should call it clearly a by-election if it has different terms and consequences.

Reviewer 4: The US might be the most prominent place, but it's far from the only one. If e.g. someone replaces a member of parliament in Germany, the don't get a full term, they get to stay in until the next general election, even if that's only a few weeks. Similarly, in the charity that I volunteered in in high school, most (but not all) elected officers had staggered terms and if someone was replaced mid-term, they would only get to serve a half-term to keep the phasing. So it's actually quite common to do it this way in my experience.

The wording in APE0 is explicit about this, there is no ambiguity, and I don't see a problem. As a non-native speaker, I can't say if this should be called a "by-election" instead of an "election", but I can say that German uses the same word for both cases.

Reviewer 5: Then refer to the process, by-election, or special election rather than to say we are to follow how things are done in the US senate. Quite patronising.

Other language(s) also doesn't use the same phrase for both cases, in case we start counting examples.

Reviewer 4: It also seems to be how seats in the House of Commons are filled, should an MP resign or die in the middle of their term. I just learned that from wikipedia after I googled "by-election", a term that I did not know before. Anyway, either American or British English is fine for this (while German is not - we don't actually vote in this case, the replacement for a member or parlament is just the highest person on the list from the original election who did not yet get a seat).

Reviewer 5: yes by-elections have different terms and conditions than normal elections. So, if it has to be a by-election then call it by-election, or if it's a normal election have the normal length of term come with it. 
Examples can be brought for both approaches from many countries.

I originally wondered why it is better for us to not to have a full term, and hoped to have people chime in who made the unanimous decision, as there was no reasoning captured in the running notes. I don't mean to contest the decision, but interested in why it's better. 

But I would contest the phrasing, and ask to call it by-election if the current ruling stands.

Reviewer 14: I'm doing a hit and run comment, so to speak. In reviewing all these references to how countries handle special elections, I'll note that the motive there is not to maintain continuity, but rather to keep regular elections synchronized on a national level. So in this case perhaps some different mechanism can be considered. For example, if the term is less than half over, a special election will be held, that will only run to the end of the regular term, and if it is more than half over, it will run to the end of the next term. There seems little point in having an election for someone that will only spend a few months in the position. For what it is worth.

Reviewer: > I originally wondered why it is better for us to not to have a full term, and hoped to have people chime in who made the unanimous decision, as there was no reasoning captured in the running notes. I don't mean to contest the decision, but interested in why it's better.

@bsipocz the reasoning is that we would want to avoiding ending up in a situation where all CoCo members have terms that are in sync which would then mean no elections some years (for example if two CoCo members have elections coming up and the two others stand down just around that time). I'd be in favour of using the term by-elections here to make it clear this is a different process. I also agree with Perry that we don't necessarily want to hold elections for someone who will hold the position for 2 months, though I'm not really sure where to place the cutoff.

Author: This has been changed to say "by-election" and clarify some of the wording a bit to be very concrete about this.

> Each Coordination Committee member's term runs for three years from when
> the election results are finalized, except when the election was to fill a
> vacancy created partway through a term. In that case, the newly-elected member’s
> term runs for the remainder of the term of the person they are replacing. There
> is no limit to the number of terms that a single individual can be elected for.

Author: The Coordination Committee discussed this and we suggest the following:
```suggestion
Each Coordination Committee member's term runs for three years from when
the election results are finalized. There is no limit to the number of terms that
a single individual can be elected for.

In the case of a vacancy partway through a term, a by-election will be held. 
The term of the newly-elected member runs for the remainder of the term of
the member they are replacing. 
```
this aligns with @bsipocz suggestion of calling it a by-election.

We also discussed @perrygreenfield's point and agreed that we think that an approach like that could work but creates some added complexity, and would open the door for a member to have a 4.5 year term (which would require more rules to prevent).  Given the Working Group was particularly motivated by keeping the election process relatively simple, we are thinking it's better to leave this as it stands. So we think instead to leave it to the voting members to judge if a by-election is needed if it's already close to the end of the term.

years to create a staggered set of replacements and provide continuity in the
Coordination Committee. The candidate with the largest number of votes gets the
longest available seat and the smallest the shortest, unless the new committee
mutually agree to a different allocation.

Vacancies
^^^^^^^^^
Coordination Committee members may resign their position at any time.

Whenever there is a vacancy during the regular Coordination Committee term an
election must take place.

If a Coordination Committee member cannot be contacted for longer than two
months without prior notification (for example, due to planned leave), then the
rest of the Coordination Committee may vote to trigger an election to replace
them for the duration of their term.

Removing Members
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, the `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ may remove
one or more sitting Coordination Committee members via a single vote.

Such a vote is triggered when a `Voting Member <votingmembers>`_ calls for one
publicly on an appropriate Project-wide communication channel, and two other
active Voting Members second the proposal.

> For Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, two-thirds of the active
> `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ must vote in support of the removal.

Author: ```suggestion
For Coordination Committee Member(s) to be removed, two-thirds of the active
`Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ (where the count *includes* the member being
voted on if they are a voting member) must vote in support of the removal.
```
This is a re-do of the suggestion I made in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61#discussion_r568184597 but without the conflict

To avoid repeated removal votes, any individual `Voting Member <votingmembers>`_
who has called for, or seconded such a vote, may not call for or second a vote

> to remove any other Coordination Committee member for one year from the original

Author: Ah, good point - I think that's meant to make it clear that this clause doesn't coverr the "current" one, but reading again it's unecessary.

motion.

The Ombudsperson
----------------
The Ombudsperson represents the interests of the Astropy community by providing
an alternative point of contact for sensitive issues such as code of conduct
violations and ethical concerns. Candidates for this project role are publicly
nominated by the Coordination Committee, after which the Coordination Committee
allows at least two weeks for comment, and then the nominee must be confirmed by
two-thirds of the active `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_.

The Ombudsperson has no term limit but can resign at any time, or be removed by
the same process as being confirmed: the Coordination Committee initiates, there
is a two-week comment period, and two-thirds of the active
`Voting Members <#votingmembers>`_ have to approve the removal. In the period
between removal/resignation and new appointment, the Coordination Committee will
temporarily take over the responsibilities of the Ombudsperson, should the need
arise.

.. _votingmembers:

The Voting Members
------------------

Role
^^^^
The Voting Members are the group of trusted individuals who operate the Astropy
Project on behalf of the community. They have authority over the Astropy

> Project’s technical resources, including the Astropy Project website itself, the

Author: I learned something today, @pllim!  The [wikipedia article on web sites](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Website#Overview) points out that "web site" was the historical usage, but it has shifted to "website", which is now what style guides all say is the right answer

Astropy GitHub organization and repositories, the issue tracker, and all Astropy
communication channels. In practice, much of this authority is passed to the
Coordination Committee via the voting processes described in this Charter.

They also assume many roles required to achieve the Project's goals, especially
those that require a high level of trust. Collectively, they make decisions that
shape the future of the Project.

Voting Members are expected to act as role models for the community and
custodians of the Project, on behalf of the community and all those who rely on
Astropy. They will act as representatives of the Astropy Project, where
necessary, including in online discussions or at official Astropy events.

Responsibilities and Rights
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Voting Members may and should participate in formal votes on:

1. Adding new Voting Members
2. Removing Voting Members
3. Electing Coordination Committee members

> 4. Removing Coordination Committee members

Author: (done in the suggestion just below)

> 1. Adding new Voting Members
> 2. Removing Voting Members
> 3. Electing Coordination Committee members
> 4. Removing Coordination Committee members
> 5. Appointment or removal of the Ombudsperson
> 6. Changes to this Charter
> 7. Other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is

Author: ```suggestion
1. Adding new Voting Members
2. Electing Coordination Committee members
3. Appointment of the Ombudsperson
4. Removing Voting Members
5. Removing Coordination Committee members
6. Removal of the Ombudsperson
7. Changes to this Charter
8. Other matters for which the Coordination Committee believes a vote is
```
Looking more closely, I think this is a safer bet.  I didn't like the idea of combining 1/2 and 3/4 because I think we want to make it clear that adding/electing are "normal", and removal are "extraordinary" events.  So I've reordered to sort of reflect that.  Look ok to you, @pllim?

   appropriate.

The mechanism, timeline, and criteria for a decisive vote are specified in the

> respective sections of this document in the first six cases and by the

Author: ```suggestion
respective sections of this document in the first seven cases and by the
```
if we take my alternative in https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/pull/61/files#r572967804

Coordination Committee in the last case.

Membership
^^^^^^^^^^

> Voting Members of the Astropy Project must demonstrate:

Author: Hmm.  I think this was "strategic ambiguity" in the sense that it's not clear to me someone *needs* *all* - e.g., if they are great at the 4 but have been sort of blah about recruiting I think they could still be a voting member, but if they know the philosophy *really* well, but don't do any of the others, that's not sufficient... 

Is there a more concise/useful way to say "most of these, probably, but maybe not quite all depending on the situation, maybe" :wink:?  But barring that, "all" is probably better than leaving this ambiguous...

> Voting Members of the Astropy Project must demonstrate:

Author: After discussing a bit with the CoCo there was agreement all is good here (especially when @astrofrog pointed out to me that the last two are "willingness"!)

  that it is factually accurate, that the nominated person accepts the
  nomination, and that their record of community activity adheres to the Code of
  Conduct.
* Once a nomination is accepted by the Coordination Committee, the Coordination
  Committee will put it to a vote among active Voting Members. Votes for adding
  voting members will be carried out at most twice a year to avoid too many
  elections. The voting dates will be announced with at least four weeks notice,
  and additional nominations will be accepted until two weeks before the
  election date. The voting will be open for at least two weeks. To successfully
  gain an appointment as a Voting Member, the nominee must receive at least four
  positive votes, as long as that constitutes a majority of those voting.
* The candidate will be informed promptly at the close of voting by a
  Coordination Committee member. If the vote is not affirmative, the
  Coordination Committee will provide feedback to the nominee.

At least one round of voting for adding voting members should be carried out
before the initial election of the Coordination Committee.

Term and Active/Emeritus Status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Voting Members have no term or term limits. Voting Members who have stopped

Author: I think this was meant to mean "they have no time in which they have to be re-voted on.  And if they did, there'd be no limit to the number of terms they have." But agreed that's pretty redundant. So this seems good to me.

contributing are encouraged to declare themselves as *emeritus*. Those who have
not made any significant contribution for two years may be asked to move
themselves to the *emeritus* category by the Coordination Committee. If no
response is received, the Coordination Committee may automatically change a
Voting Member’s status to *emeritus*. To record and honor their contributions,
*emeritus* Voting Members will continue to be listed. *Emeritus* Voting Members
are not able to participate in votes.

> Removing Voting Members

Reviewer 6: These are not clear from the wordings:

* So, when someone is removed this way, they don't go to "emeritus" list, or do they?
* Also, I am guessing they are not allowed to re-run to be voting member again in the future? Or is that not true?
* Since non-voting member can run for CoCo, are they still qualified to run for CoCo?

Author: Hmm.  Should we say the voting members hold a second vote to bar from future office if convincted? (too soon?)

More seriously, all good points. Definitely not for "emeritus" (that came up in the WG in passing), but I'm not sure the other two were discussed.  

My feeling is that there's no need to make a rule against running for CoCo, since it's the *same people* who voted them out who'd then vote in the CoCo.

Less clear to me is about voting membership, again, it's the same group, so I guess there's no harm in allowing it, but maybe we should say "at least a year" or similar to prevent "election spamming"?

I'll update for the first and third of these, but might be good to get your thoughts, @pllim or @astrofrog on this second item (one year)

Author: The CoCo discussed this and agreed we think it's best to leave the latter two un-specified since hopefully this is an edge case, and the voting for CoCo or to be re-added as a member is unlikely to succeed anyway.  So better to "never say never" (@astrofrog's words).

Reviewer 6: If I have learned anything in the past 5 years, is that any unwritten norm relying on good faith will be broken at some point... but since this has been discussed and decided upon otherwise, I rest my case.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
In exceptional circumstances, it may be necessary to remove someone from the
Voting Members against their will. A vote must be held to remove a Voting
Member. Such a vote is triggered by a motion made by an active Voting Member,
which must be seconded by an additional Voting Member. The vote must conclude
no more than three months after the motion is seconded. Removal requires
approval by two-thirds of all active Voting Members at the time the motion is

> made. The motion, second, and vote will be held in private. Removal under this

Reviewer 15: What exactly does "in private" mean? What transparency/accountability is there, eg. should the Ombudsperson audit the result, if even the voting members don't see it? It's hard for me to reword this without knowing more about the intention.

Author: This is also along the lines of implementation details where the WG did not want to specify all the details. By default that means it falls to the CoCo + Ombudsperson, but my thinking would be that once we've established the voting software we're using, we'd see if it can also handle secret nominations. If not, we might have to use some other automated process.  But the intent is to not write too much procedure here since it might change over time.  The key element is that it's "private" as in "secret ballot".  So perhaps this is the better wording?:

```suggestion
made. The motion, second, and vote will be by secret ballot. Removal under this
```

Author: (actually since this is the last thing holding the PR up and it's mostly a clarification item, I'm going to make the command decision to just accept this and proceed)

Reviewer: Looks good to me, that is what was meant anyway

provision will be reflected by updating the list of Voting Members.

It may be necessary for the Ombudsperson and the Coordination Committee to
remove a Voting Member for violations of the Code of Conduct. In this case, the
Coordination Committee and Ombudsperson will work together to make this

> decision.

Reviewer 15: I have trouble seeing under what circumstances voting members (previous paragraph) might want to remove a members's **vote** (as opposed to their named role, which they might not be carrying out diligently) **other than** a conduct violation.

Author: The WG did discuss this, and the consensus there was that this is part of what required the "In exceptional circumstances," clause at the top.  That is, it is indeed hard to be sure what exactly might be cause, but there was agreement that isn't a reason to make it impossible.  The voting process for removal is really meant to be a check in the other direction: if someone things there was a violation that maybe isn't quite covered by the CoC and hence the CoCo/ombudsperson don't feel they can inercede, the members themselves can do so.  That makes it so that the voting members are essentially self-governing because they have control over their own membership, while still allowing the CoCo/ombudsperson the ability to react faster than the voting membership when necessary.

It's plausible that in less egregious cases the CoCo/ombudsperson would likely follow the voting process *anyway*, since they're beholden to the voting members anyway :shrug:

At any rate, while the above hopefully clears things up more, the point is that this was discussed quite a bit before so I don't think we can reverse it at this late of a date.  But as @astrofrog pointed out, this is meant to be a living document!

Approving and Modifying This Charter
------------------------------------
This document was submitted following the process in `APE 1`_, and the normal APE
acceptance procedures will be followed. The Coordination Committee at the time
of submitting this APE are all co-authors and therefore will not override any
consensus of the community on accepting the final version.

Changes to this Charter after it has been accepted should follow the

> modification process in `APE 1`_, with the exception that the final approval of

Reviewer 6: So, this this PR blocked by #60 ?

Author: I think not in the sense that right now there *is* no APE1 modification process.  You're right the intent was for #60 to go in first, but I think we can de-couple thme by just saying this one is saying "whatever the process is, it applies" (which means it is implicitly updated when #60 is in)

the modification requires approval by a two-thirds vote of the
`Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ rather than approval by the Coordination
Committee.

Attribution and Acknowledgments
-------------------------------
The format and some of the structures outlined in this document are heavily
inspired by the Python Language Governance structure
(`PEP 13 <https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0013/>`_), the YT Project's Team
Infrastructure
(`YTEP 1776 <https://ytep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/YTEPs/YTEP-1776.html>`_), and
earlier less-formal descriptions of the Astropy governance.

.. _APE 1: https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE1.rst

Branches and Pull Requests
==========================
N/A

Implementation
==============
This Charter enters into force upon this APE being accepted (see the last

> section of the description). At that time the ``GOVERNANCE.rst`` file in the

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
section of the description). At that time the ``GOVERNANCE.md`` file in the
```

astropy repo should be updated to point to this document.

Backward Compatibility
======================
This Charter supersedes previous un-codified governance understandings, but does
not serve to invalidate the APE process or any other processes or policies that
pre-date it and do not conflict.

Alternatives
============
The Astropy Governance Working Group discussed a wide range of alternatives on
both the broad scope of Project governance and details of this Charter. It is
not practical to summarize that in the text of this APE, but the Working Group's

> `running notes <https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XsJCQDm1EBWm2w2yDbohWw2HhMAO_-YhnOMhBsNV82I/edit?usp=sharing>`_

Reviewer 6: We should lock this doc down, so we cannot change history.

Author: Done - the only people who can edit now are admins

direction.

Detailed Description
====================
The Governance Charter is described in this section. The initial version is the
outcome of several months of discussion by the Astropy Governance Working Group,
which aimed to both codify existing informal governance rules as well as update
them with new ideas that are consistent with the philosophy of and vision for
the Astropy project.

Ultimate Authority: The Astropy Community
-----------------------------------------
The Astropy Project derives its authority from the whole community - developers,
users, and even potential participants in the broader astronomical and
scientific software community. All have a vested interest in the success of the
Project, so all governance in the end belongs to this community in its entirety.
The governance Charter described below provides levels of delegation of that
authority, particularly to the `Voting Members <votingmembers>`_ and the
Coordination Committee.

The Coordination Committee
--------------------------

Composition
^^^^^^^^^^^
The Coordination Committee is a committee that is composed of four or five
members (this number will be decided by vote at the same time as the first

> Coordination Committee election). The
> Coordination Committee should aim to represent the diversity of the Astropy
> community.  Hence, it should aim for diversity in geography, skill set (both
> astronomy and developer), background, and so on. Furthermore, unless it would

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Coordination Committee election). Unless it would
```
